# The Rise of Automation: Why Coding Is Becoming a Job for Everyone [OUTLINE v1]

- Discuss, in introduction, the basic premise of automation and computerization in modern society.
- Detail why particular occupations and industries have seen the most severe decline in employment from automation: occupations, like manufacturing, in which core job tasks follow well-defined repetitive procedures, they can easily be codified in computer software and thus performed by computers.
- When dealing with any form of skilled labor, the emphasis is on that **skilled** characteristic.  No matter the particular _form_ of labor a skilled laborer performs, he or she is still highly trained and skillful.  In many ways, a factory worker or plumber is no different from an database administrator or programmer: In each case, the individual focused on and learned a different set of skills applicable to the job at hand.
- Emphasize that, due to increase in automation, a loss in many "traditional" occupations opens opportunities for jobs in other fields, namely coding.

## The Trajectory of Automation

- Discuss how computerization is beginning to work its way into more creative occupations, where subtle judgment is often required (finances, hospital ICUs, etc).
- Automation is even starting to encroach on software engineering and programming, where machine learning advances allow algorithms to make complex parameter and design choices.
> http://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/downloads/academic/The_Future_of_Employment.pdf
- Outline how automated testing has been a large part of the rise of agile development methodologies and other DevOps practices for a few years now.
> The impact of computerisation on labour market outcomes is well-established in the literature, documenting the decline of employment in routine intensive
occupations – i.e. occupations mainly consisting of tasks following well-defined procedures that can easily be performed by sophisticated algorithms. For example,
studies by Charles, et al. (2013) and Jaimovich and Siu (2012) emphasise that the ongoing decline in manufacturing employment and the disappearance
of other routine jobs is causing the current low rates of employment.
> Because the core job tasks of manufacturing occupations follow well-defined repetitive procedures, they can easily be codified in computer software and thus performed by computers

- Detail how workers whose jobs are lost to robots can be transitioned to other forms of skilled labor, according to labor economists.
- “Just allowing the private market to automate without any support is a recipe for blaming immigrants and trade and other things, even when it’s the long impact of technology,” says [Lawrence Katz](http://scholar.harvard.edu/lkatz/biocv), who was the Labor Department's chief economist under President Clinton.

> [SOURCE](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/21/upshot/the-long-term-jobs-killer-is-not-china-its-automation.html) Labor economists say there are ways to ease the transition for workers whose jobs have been displaced by robots. They include retraining programs, stronger unions, more public-sector jobs, a higher minimum wage, a bigger earned-income tax credit and, for the next generation of workers, more college degrees.

- Provide data from paper by Acemoglu and Restrepo, indicating that while technological advances cause some forms of labor to become automated, at the same time more complex versions of existing tasks become available for laborers to undertake.

> [SOURCE, Introduction](http://economics.mit.edu/files/11512) Today, while industrial robots, digital technologies and computer-controlled machines replace labor, we are once again simultaneously witnessing the emergence of new tasks ranging from engineering and programming functions to those performed by audio-visual specialists, executive assistants, data administrators and analysts, meeting planners or computer support specialists. Indeed, during the last 30 years, new tasks and new job titles account for a large fraction of U.S. employment growth. To document this fact, we use data from Lin (2011) that measures the share of new job titles—in which workers perform newer tasks than those employed in more traditional jobs—within each occupation. In 2000, about 70% of the workers employed as computer software developers (an occupation employing one million people at the time) held new job titles. Similarly, in 1990 a radiology technician and in 1980 a management analyst were new job titles. Figure 1 shows that for each decade since 1980, employment growth has been greater in occupations with more new job titles. The regression line shows that occupations with 10 percentage points more new job titles at the beginning of each decade grow 5.05% faster over the next 10 years (standard error=1.3%). From 1980 to 2007, total employment in the U.S. grew by 17.5%. About half (8.84%) of this growth is explained by the additional employment growth in occupations with new job titles relative to a benchmark category with no new job titles.2

## Modern Factory Jobs are Automation Jobs

- Discuss how modern factories, with increased robotics and computerized automation heavily ingrained in their workflows, are no longer the labor-reliant mills of the 18th century.
- Instead, factories are now highly technical systems, [requiring employees that can work with computers, robotics, and automated systems](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/30/education/edlife/factory-workers-college-degree-apprenticeships.html?_r=0).
- Detail how many manufacturers and other factory-owners, such as John Deere, heavily focus on hiring skilled laborers who can work with computers: "The toolbox is now a computer."
- Include other examples of employers that are seeking college-educated individuals for factory-level work, such as Siemens.
- Discuss the rise in apprenticeships from many employers in various fields, including I.T., insurance adjuster, and pharmacy technician.
- Outline the notion that coding isn't the pinnacle of a well-suited employee for many organizations: Instead, it's the ability to automate.  Analyzing and evaluating problems logically, which can then be transferred into tangible solutions in the workplace.  

> [SOURCE pr 3](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/30/education/edlife/factory-workers-college-degree-apprenticeships.html?_r=0) “In our factories, there’s a computer about every 20 or 30 feet,” said Eric Spiegel, who recently retired as president and chief executive of Siemens U.S.A. “People on the plant floor need to be much more skilled than they were in the past. There are no jobs for high school graduates at Siemens today.”

> [SOURCE, pg. 18](http://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/downloads/academic/The_Future_of_Employment.pdf): Occupations that require subtle judgement are also increasingly susceptible to computerisation. To many such tasks, the unbiased decision making of an algorithm represents a comparative advantage over human operators. In the most 18 challenging or critical applications, as in ICUs, algorithmic recommendations may serve as inputs to human operators; in other circumstances, algorithms will themselves be responsible for appropriate decision-making. In the financial sector, such automated decision-making has played a role for quite some time. AI algorithms are able to process a greater number of financial announcements, press releases, and other information than any human trader, and then act faster upon them (Mims, 2010). Services like Future Advisor similarly use AI to offer personalised financial advice at larger scale and lower cost. Even the work of software engineers may soon largely be computerisable. For example, advances in ML allow a programmer to leave complex parameter and design choices to be appropriately optimised by an algorithm (Hoos, 2012). Algorithms can further automatically detect bugs in software (Hangal and Lam, 2002; Livshits and Zimmermann, 2005; Kim, et al., 2008), with a reliability that humans are unlikely to match. Big databases of code also offer the eventual prospect of algorithms that learn how to write programs to satisfy specifications provided by a human. Such an approach is likely to eventually improve upon human programmers, in the same way that human-written compilers eventually proved inferior to automatically optimised compilers. An algorithm can better keep the whole of a program in working memory, and is not constrained to human-intelligible code, allowing for holistic solutions that might never occur
to a human. Such algorithmic improvements over human judgement are likely to become increasingly common.

## Programming is for Everyone

- Discuss how coding is no longer a profession that should be considered for only an elite few; highly-skilled and technically-minded individuals.
- Instead, there's an influx of free or inexpensive education and training, millions of existing developers often able to provide guidance, and most importantly, a huge demand for programmers and logical thinkers in technical positions.
- Detail that the coding is, in many cases, just another form of skilled labor.  In modern coding, knowing how to _find_ an answer to a problem is far more important than _knowing_ the answer.
- Emphasize that, while technologies within the developer world are always in flux, this also lends itself well to newcomers, as newer technologies and techniques are always gaining popularity.
- Discuss how advanced mathematics or fancy algorithms are very much the exception to most development work, and rarely required for most programmers.  Instead, development is often done with fairly grounded technologies, for organizations that often don't know of (or need) such fancy solutions.  A simple web page or automation script is, more often than not, what many businesses are looking for, and most newcomers to programming can tackle such tasks without the needs for years of training.
- Highlight organizations like [BitSource](http://www.bitsourceky.com/), which are aiming to transition workers from "traditional" jobs to developers.
> https://www.wired.com/2017/02/programming-is-the-new-blue-collar-job
- Most professional developers are not, nor do they strive to be, the prototypical "genius coder" portrayed in the movies or the media.